# RFP-001: Community DA Adapters

- Accepting one or multiple proposals: **Multiple**
- Submit by: **Ongoing**
- Selection by: **Ongoing**
- RFP Category: **devtools-adapters**
- Discuss the RFP here: [Link](https://forum.availproject.org/t/discussion-rfp-001-community-da-adapters/616)
- Application Form: [Link](https://airtable.com/app3uGEo7mZ5jbIfW/pagx1Wk6Fa1tEgqH8/form)

## Context/Background
Avail is building rollup infrastructure designed to provide scalable blockspace and data availability as a base layer for rollups. It largely does not execute any transactions. Avail has no smart contracts/general-purpose execution environment. Instead, Avail applications are rollups (or similar constructs) that rely on Avail for blockspace while handling execution themselves.

As such, most developers will likely be interacting with a higher-level framework. For example, a rollup SDK or a rollup as a service (RAAS) tool, configured to use Avail for data availability.

Given the multitude of rollups frameworks, environments, and ecosystems out there, Avail is interested in encouraging and fostering support within community projects for selecting a DA layer, with built-in Avail support specifically.

## Project Description
An ideal DA Adapter project has the following features:
- Enables submitting transaction data to a separate DA layer instead of the L1 it currently uses (e.g., Ethereum).
- Changes to verification contract(s) to support Avail’s attestation bridge to verify DA during settlement.
- Written in an appropriate manner for submission upstream into the community project, including following the project’s conventions.
- If preferred by the project, a framework for DA adapters so that other DA layers can plug into the same framework.
- Documentation
- Demo
- Benchmarks demonstrating the cost/performance/gas savings realized by using off-chain DA

## Potential Adapter Ideas
- ZkSync Adapter
- Arbitrum Orbit/Stylus Adapter
- Cartesi Adapter
- Fuel Adapter
- Astria Adapter
- SHARP Adapter
- Dojo Adapter
- Slush Adapter
- Kakarot Adapter
- Radius Adapter

The above mentioned Adapters, although not an exhaustive list, are some ecosystems we would like to see the community build DA Adapters for. We invite everyone to contribute ideas and suggest and work upon other ecosystem DA Adapters as well. 

## References
You can see some of our existing ecosystem integrations/adapters at the [avail-uncharted](https://github.com/availproject/avail-uncharted) repository.

Visit the [Avail Docs](https://docs.availproject.org/) site to learn about Avail and how to build with it.

## Milestones and Funding
Please include in your proposal a set of milestones and a budget. It should be tailored for the specific details of the proposed project, but the following is an example of the kind of detail and format expected:

| # | Description                                                                          | Funding | Timeframe (Est) |
|---|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|-----------------|
| 1 | Detailed technical design                                                            | TBD     | 2 weeks         |
| 2 | Writing tx data to Avail                                                             | TBD     | 1 weeks         |
| 3 | Verification of DA via attestation bridge & removal of data sending to L1            | TBD     | 2 weeks         |
| 4 | Testing, benchmarking & documentation                                                | TBD     | 2 weeks         |
| 5 | Project deliverables are open sourced and made public (codebase, documentation, etc) | TBD     | 1 week          |
| 6 | Ongoing maintenance updates                                                          | TBD     | Ongoing         |   

## Recommended Team
We recommend putting together a team with the following profile:
- Solid knowledge of blockchain fundamentals as well as experience with rollup design and construction.
- Specific experience with the specific stack being integrated. For example, having experience with zkSync internals is very helpful for creating an adapter for it.
- Smart contract development.
- Prior experience building with substrate-based blockchains is a plus.

Please provide links to your team members' Github or LinkedIn profiles.

## Application instructions
- **To submit a grant proposal, please [submit this Form](https://airtable.com/app3uGEo7mZ5jbIfW/pagx1Wk6Fa1tEgqH8/form).**
- Get involved with discussing the RFP with the team and with the rest of the community here. 

For questions about submitting a proposal, you can also email exploration[at]availproject[dot]org

You can also contact us via Discord via the #grants channel
